       Chapter I GENERAL INFORMATION
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

Section 1. History

     The University charter was laid down by two Presidential Decrees, P.D. 1434 and P.D. 1437. On June 10, 1978, then President Ferdinand E. Marcos issued P.D. 1434 which established the Isabela State University by merging the Isabela State College of Agriculture (ISCA) at Echague, the Cagayan Valley Institute of Technology (CVIT) at Cabagan, and absorbing the college courses of the Isabela School of Arts and Trades (ISAT) in Ilagan, Roxas Memorial Agricultural and Industrial School (RMAIS) in Roxas, San Mateo Vocational and Industrial School (SMVIS) in San Mateo and Jones Rural School (JRS) in Jones, Isabela. The merger likewise identified Echague to serve as the main campus and administrative site. The decree further mandated the University to establish an effective and efficient institution of higher learning that will provide better service in the professional and technical training in agriculture, the arts, sciences, humanities and technology and in the conduct of scientific researches and technological studies.

     In 1999, the CHED Memorandum Order No. 18 s. 1999 which provides the guidelines for the integration of CHED Supervised Institutions (CSIs) to SUCs was enacted. Pursuant to this Order, the first CHED-supervised institution that was integrated to the University is the Cauayan Polytechnic College at Cauayan, Isabela. In year 2002, two CSIs were again merged into the system, namely: Delfin Albano Memorial Institute of Agriculture and Technology (DMIAT) in San Mariano; and the Angadanan Agro-Industrial College (AAIC) in Angadanan, Isabela. Responding on the request of the provincial government of Isabela, the University extended its academic programs in Palanan effective first semester of Academic Year 2005-2006. Not long after, and through the collaborative efforts of University officials and the local government of the City of Santiago, the extension of ISU at this sprawling city begun its operation in 2007.

     To date, the Isabela State University system maintains nine campuses and two satellite extension campuses that are strategically positioned in Isabela, the second largest province in the country, comprising of 34 municipalities and 3 cities: 1 independent and 2 component cities. These campuses are also straddling along the Region's "Midrib-Peripheral Growth Centers and Socio-Economic Development Zone" where the major urban and commercial centers of the region ply their trades. This is aside from having an edge of strategic proximity to the site of the Regional Agro-Industrial Center in Cauayan City, and its accessibility to Santa Ana in Cagayan, a special economic zone and entry point of International trade in Cagayan Valley. Likewise, the campuses lie within the periphery of Tuguegarao and Santiago Cities, respectively, the commercial and financial hubs of Region 02.

     Forty years since its inception, the University has undoubtedly metamorphosed into a highly credible Higher Education Institution (HEI). Its enrollment is remarkably and consistently increasing, though its momentum was interrupted by the implementation of the K-to-12 Program. It is, likewise, continuously producing national topnotchers in licensure examinations.

     The Isabela State University has been named as one among the 21 leading SUCs in the Philippines. It is similarly recognized as one of the few level IV SUCs in the country. Now, it focuses on attaining loftier position with respect to SUC Levelling.

     It is highly notable that the Isabela State University has recently assumed lead roles in Research not only in the country, but also in Asia. It is currently serving as the host or base agency of two regional research centers, namely, the Higher Education Regional Research Center (HERRC) under the Commission on Higher Education; and the Cagayan Valley Agricultural Resources Research and Development (CVARRD) under PCARRD-DOST. Being chosen as the base agency is a recognition of the University being well-known as among the HEIs in the Region in terms of its capability in research management and scientific undertakings. At present, the University is a home of 17 Research and Development Centers and Laboratories, a concrete testament of its formidable and impressive Research and Development capabilities.

     Together with its instructional leadership, preeminent roles in research, intensified community engagement, aggressive thrusts in resource generation and focus on internationalization, the University is determined in realizing its vision, mission, and goals. Nowadays, ISU stands as an indispensable and reliable partner for agro-industrial developments in the Region in particular and in the country in general, ably supported by all of its dedicated and committed stakeholders. The Isabela State University is, undoubtedly, soaring into greater heights.

Section 2. The University Seal


     The University Seal is the unifying theme evoking wisdom and positive virtues and qualities that can be attached or displayed with pride in every object of communication - letters, websites, products, billboards, banners, etc. It is a trademark of identification and ownership and an assurance of quality and excellence distinct for Isabela State University.

     The New University Seal was created with elements associated with symbolic meanings. The following describe these symbolisms in the use of space, objects, text, and colors in the making of the seal:

     Space allocation: The circular area is divided into two areas the ratio of which is patterned after the golden ratio - a ratio symbolic of beauty, balance, and perfection. The nine golden rays of the sun emanate from the center of the circle and each ray cuts an angle of 24.72 degrees for a total of
222.5 degrees. The other area cuts an angle of 137.5 degrees. The ratio of the smaller area to the bigger one is 0.618. This is the same ratio for the bigger area and the whole circle. The ratio 0.618 is referred to among the Greeks as the Golden ratio. The radius of the small circle cuts that of the bigger one dividing it into two segments exhibiting the Golden Ratio even as it does for their areas. Objects divided using this ratio exhibit an excellent proportion that produces beauty, balance, and equity.

     Color scheme: In some cultures, yellow is associated with cowardice. Among the Japanese, it is the symbol of courage. Other cultures use the color to emphasize care and hope. The use of the Golden Yellow in the seal symbolizes humility amidst greatness, a hidden power that drives hope for greatness in the future. Precisely, it is the color of early morning sunshine that beats darkness and illuminates the greatness of space and the vastness of what it contains. Even the golden rays of the early morning sun give the feeling of elation, hope and life for a better day just like water as one of the four basic elements of nature. It depicts that education illuminates the world

and breaks the bondage of ignorance; it is the great equalizer that empowers humankind and brings about goodness of life.

* Bright Red is the color of energy. It symbolizes the strength of its drive and commitment to its vision and mission. Red is the Chinese color for good business relations. While it symbolizes energy and strength, it is consistently used among cultures to seek restraint and help. Restraint is symbolic of accountability and as a state institution, of public accountability - public trust, public service. The bright red color denotes the university's quest for and responsible exploitation of knowledge - information, skills, and technologies.
* The leaf green color in its various hues is the color of life and intelligence - the environment, people, the flora and fauna and all the intelligence of the elements their ecologies exhibit. Its use in the seal is symbolic of the university's original mandate in agriculture and forestry education and now as a comprehensive university; it depicts the character of the institution as the University for People, Nature, Innovation and Entrepreneurship.
* The brown color is a versatile foundation of many colors. It is the color of the earth, a strong foundation from which to build upon. It is symbolic of capacity and strength in unity - binding all the elements of the institution together. Brown is also the color of acceptance symbolic of the university's inclusive character inviting the participation of many without discrimination to build a synergy that can build wisdom and positive virtues.
* Deep blue is the color of confidence and security. Aside from red for good business relations, blue is used by banks to create the feeling of security and confidence among its clients. The blue skies are seen as one that binds the universe in peace and giving it the promise of a vibrant good life. Its use in the seal symbolizes Integrity as one of the valued institutional characters.

The Objects:

1. The green fields represent the potentials of the university from where many will be built and grown. The vanishing horizon spells out an

unlimited arena for academic activities as well as the boundless extent of what knowledge and products can bring.

2. The torch with the acronym of the university, ISU, with its burning red- hot flames, depicts the institution's energy and dedication to its mission. It shares the rays of its radiant light rays with the sun's rays depicting the university as one of the leading universities enlightening this world through education.

3. The shapes of concentric circles holding every element of the seal symmetric to their common center is a symbol of balance and academic neutrality. The outermost one is a rope spliced throughout its length of no distinguishable end strips symbolizing the strength and unity of the elements therein. The institution's official name, ISABELA STATE UNIVERSITY is wrapped around its beginning from its founding year in 1978.

4. Overall, the SEAL is a simple and an uncomplicated creation that evokes integrity, intelligence, excellence, beauty, energy, unity, peace and hope as it depicts an institution - a University for People, Nature, Innovation and Entrepreneurship keeping faithful to its past and steadfast towards building a great future for people and the environment.

Approved as per Board Resolution No. 10, series of 2012.

UNIVERSITY VISION

A leading research university in the ASEAN Region.

UNIVERSITY MISSION

     The Isabela State University is committed to develop globally competitive human, technological resources and services through quality instruction, innovative research, responsive community engagement and viable resource management programs for inclusive growth and sustainable development.

CORE VALUE STATEMENT ONE ISU for Q-R
Outcome-oriented University Nurturing Nationalism,
Environmentalism, Efficiency and Effectiveness Imbibing Integrity,
Spirituality, Social Responsibility and Unity towards
Quality and Relevance

QUALITY POLICY

     The Isabela State University is determined to be a lead university in instruction, research, extension and resource generation through continual improvement of services and commits to comply with the standards set by statutory, regulatory and accrediting bodies.

To uphold these commitments ISU shall attain the following quality objectives:

1. Sustain academic excellence and quality in instruction;
2. Generate research breakthroughs;
3. Engage in sectoral activities for community development;
4. Develop products for glocalization;
5. Support students' participation to local and international fora to
enhance their potentialities; and
6. Review on periodic basis, the Quality Management System (QMS) and gather feedback on the level of client satisfaction as basis for continual improvement.

Chapter II

ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS, PROCESS AND PROCEDURES

     The University shall admit or re-admit students who meet the following requirements:

1. GENERAL ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL ACADEMIC PROGRAMS

a. Incoming Freshmen must submit the following:
1.a.1. Report Card (Form 138);
1.a.2. Certificate of Good Moral Character;
1.a.3. Photocopy of Senior High School Diploma;
1.a.4. University Admission Test Result;
1.a.5. Four (4) Copies of 2x2 ID Picture;
1.a.6. Certificate of Physical/Medical Examination;
1.a.7. PSA/NSO Authenticated Copy of Birth Certificate; and
1.a.8. Other requirements prescribed by the College/Department, CHED, PRC as deemed necessary.

b. Transferees from SUCs and Non SUCs must submit the following:
1.b.1. Certification of Grades showing all the subjects taken from the school last attended;
1.b.2. Honorable Dismissal;
1.b.3. Certificate of Good Moral Character;
1.b.4. Four (4) copies of 2x2 ID picture with white background and name tag (scanned picture or digital copy not accepted);
1.b.5. Authenticated PSA copy of Birth Certificate;
1.b.6. Accomplished Substitution Form of subjects taken from other SUCs as deemed necessary; and
1.b.7. Accomplished Validation Form of subjects taken from non- SUCs.

Note:	All incoming freshmen and transferee students mustcomply with additional requirements and pass the following:

1. Entrance / admission test administered by the Office of Student Affairs and Services;
2. Interview of the screening committee of the college; and
3. Medical and dental examination administered by the University.

c. Foreign Students must submit the following:
1.c.1. University Admission Test/College Admission Test;
1.c.2. 	Passport/	Valid	Student Visa/	Student Study	Permit/ Student Visa Conversion;
1.c.3. Four (4) copies of 2x2 colored ID picture;
1.c.4. Student permit - certification from the embassy of the country of origin for his/ her eligibility to study in the Philippines;
1.c.5. Two (2) copies of affidavit of support or certification from a reputable bank in the applicant's country of origin about his/her capability to finance travel, educational, personal and other expenses that are expected to be incurred while staying in the Philippines;
1.c.6. Authenticated copy of birth certificate;
1.c.7. Certificate of completion of a secondary curriculum or its equivalent (Authenticated TOR from the school/university graduated in the home country);
1.c.8. Pay the non-refundable application fee;
1.c.9. Certificate of good moral character issued by the last school attended;
1.c.10. Security clearance from the Philippine Embassy;
1.c.11. Alien Certification of Registration (ARC);
1.c.12. Statement of Personal History;
1.c.13. English Proficiency Test score. For test of English as a foreign language (TOFEL), the score must be equivalent to at least 80 or a band score of at least 5.0 in an International English Language Testing System (IELTS);

1.c.14. Medical certificate and drug test result;
1.c.15. Meet all the prescribed requirements by the Department of Foreign Affairs, Bureau of Immigration and Deportation, and the Commission on Higher Education;
1.c.16. Pass the health examination conducted by the University Infirmary; and
1.c.18. Present an approved application form.

2. VALIDATION OF SUBJECTS

A transferee who comes from a non-SUC shall:

2.1. Submit credentials for evaluation;
2.2. Secure a validation from the Registrar's Office;
2.3. Pay validation fee;
2.4. Present receipt of validation fee to the Dean;
2.5. Report to the Program Chair for test validation; and
2.6. 	Submit validation test results to the Registrar's Office and proceed for enrollment.

a. Returning Students

A returning student must submit the following:

2.a.1. Approved Leave of Absence (LOA);
2.a.2. Accomplished re-admission form;
2.a.3. Certification of Grades; and
2.a.4. Result of evaluation of grades by the Program Chair / Registration Adviser.

b. Securing Leave of Absence (LOA)

     An undergraduate student who will not enroll for one (1) semester or to a maximum of 2 years shall file a Leave of Absence (LOA):

2.b.1. Secure and accomplish Exit and LOA Form from the OSAS;
2.b.2. Submit duly accomplished LOA Form to the Registrar's
Office;
2.b.3. LOA shall not exceed two (2) academic years; and
2.b.4. Returning students on LOA for more than two (2) academic years shall be required to take six units refresher subjects related to his/her course to be determined by the program chair.

Note:
1. Leave of absence shall be excluded from the prescribed number of years the student is expected to finish the curriculum and maximum residency allowed.
2. For returning students and other students who went on a leave of absence, the determination and computation of their free higher education benefits shall be without prejudice to the most expedient way of completing their studies, as subsumed under Section 6 of the RA 10931.

3. REGISTRATION PROCEDURES

Freshmen and Transferees
3.a.1. Accomplish application form for Admission Test from the Office of Student Affairs and Services (OSAS) through the Guidance Office;
3.a.2. Pay testing fee at the Cashier's Office (as applicable); and
3.a.3. Take the test and secure test results from the Guidance Unit.

4. ENROLLMENT PROCEDURES

4.a. Freshmen and Transferees

4.a.1. Proceed to the concerned Program Chair/ Dean for interview;

4.a.2. Undergo Medical/ Dental Examination at the University Infirmary;
4.a.3. Secure student number from the Office of Student Affairs and Services (OSAS)/ Registrar's Office;
4.a.4. Submit admission requirements to the Registrar's Office
where subjects are encoded and fees are assessed;
4.a.5. Pay the assessed fees at the Cashier's Office (as applicable);
4.a.6. For scholars, get approval of scholarship from the OSAS (as applicable);
4.a.7. Enroll National Service Training Program (NSTP) at the NSTP office (as applicable); and Proceed to the Campus Business Affairs Office (CBAO) for I.D. Processing.

4.b. Continuing/ Old Students
4.b.1. Accomplish Student Cumulative Record at the Guidance Office;
4.b.2. Secure certification of grades from the college/ Registrar's
office;
4.b.3. Accomplish pre-registration form to be approved by the registration adviser;
4.b.4. 	Proceed to the Registrar's Office for the encoding of subjects and assessment of fees;
4.b.5. For scholars, get approval of scholarship from the OSAS (as applicable); and
4.b.6. Pay the assessed fees at the Cashier's Office (as applicable).

4.c. Returnee and Continuing Professional Education (CPE)students

4.c.1. 	Accomplish	Admission	Form	and	Student	Cumulative Record at	the Guidance Office;
4.c.2. Proceed to the Program Chair for interview/ advising;
4.c.3. Proceed to the Registrar's Office for the encoding of
subjects and assessment of fees; and
4.c.4. Pay to the Cashier's office the assessed fees (as applicable).

5. DROPPING/ ADDING/ CHANGING OF SUBJECT

Dropping

5.a.1. Secure a dropping form from the Registrar's Office;
5.a.2. Accomplish the dropping form to be signed by the subject Instructor/Professor and the Registration Adviser, noted by the Dean/Program Chair; and
5.a.3. Submit a copy of the form at the Registrar's Office one week after the last day of enrollment in a term.

Note: Any student who fails to attend classes shall be considered dropped. Subjects officially dropped within three (3) days after the start of classes will no longer be reflected in the TOR.

Adding of Subjects

5.b.1. Secure adding form from the Registrar's Office;
5.b.2. Accomplish adding form to be signed by the subject Instructor/Professor and the Registration Adviser, noted by the Dean/Program Chair and for approval by the Registrar;
5.b.3. Pay adding fee to the Cashier's Office (as applicable); and
5.b.4. 	Submit approved adding form to the Registrar's Office within 7 days after the first day of classes.

6. CROSS-ENROLLMENT

     Students may be allowed to cross enroll within the system and in other Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) following the procedures below:

a. For students who will cross enroll within the system and to other Higher Education Institutions (HEIs):

6.a.1. Secure permit from the Registrar's Office; and

6.a.2. 	Seek recommendation from the Program/ Department Chair, Dean and Registrar, and approval from the Executive Officer/Campus Administrator.

b. For outside students who will cross enroll within the University:

6.b.1. Present to the OSAS the Permission to Cross Enroll form secured from their present school;
6.b.2. Submit to the Registrar the Permission to Cross Enroll form recognized by the OSAS; and
6.b.3. At the end of the semester the student will be issued a COG after completion of the subject.

7. CHANGING OR SHIFTING OF MAJOR FIELD OR PROGRAM

A student who shifts or changes to another major field or program shall:

7.a.1. Have completed at least one semester in the program;
7.a.2. Secure, accomplish and submit duly approved shifting form
to the Registrar's Office; and
7.a.3. Be allowed to shift twice only subject to the policies of the admitting college/ department and the grade requirement of the program.

8. LOSS I.D.

In case of lost I.D., the student shall immediately:

8.a.1. Report to the Security Guard;
8.a.2. Pay Declaration of Loss fee at the Cashier's Office;
8.a.3. Accomplish Declaration of Loss from the OSAS; and
8.a.4. Present current registration and apply for new ID at the Campus Business Affairs Office.

Chapter III ACADEMIC POLICIES

     The University's Admission and Retention Policies are subject to the provisions of the RA 10931 known as the "Universal Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act of 2017".
     In accordance to Section 4 of the Act, All Filipino students who are either currently enrolled at the time of its effectivity, or shall enroll at any time thereafter, may avail of the exemption from paying tuition and other school fees for units enrolled, in courses leading to a bachelor's degree in any SUC and LUC.

1. ADMISSION AND RETENTION POLICIES

     The University will implement the provisions of CMO no. 64 s 2017, regarding the policies and guidelines on drug testing for all programs.
     Old students who will undergo drug testing will be determined through Stratified Random Sampling and with expenses borne by the University. (Please refer to Appendix C, for Policies Guidelines and Procedures for Isabela State University Mandatory Random Drug Testing of Students).

A. Admission Policies


CriteriaWeight Program with Licensure ExamProgram without Licensure ExamSHS Card Rating25%at least 85%at least 75%College Admission Test (CAT)50%
no specific rating requiredInterview (College level)25%General Weighted
Averageat least 50%at least 40%
Note:
1. Other requirements/ criteria prescribed by the PSG/CMO of the program and the concerned college may be applied.

2. A quota system based on ranking of all applicants shall be implemented depending on the number of sections to be offered for first year.

B. Retention Policies

1. The following guidelines will be followed:
* Warning - students who failed in 25% of the total number of units enrolled during the semester. *
* Probation - students who failed in 50% of the total number of units enrolled during the semester. *
* Dismissed - students who failed in 75% but less than 100% of the total number of academic units enrolled during the semester will be dismissed from the program but may apply to enroll in another program. *
* Permanent Disqualification - students who failed in 100% of the academic units enrolled during the semester will no longer be allowed to enroll in any program offered in all campuses of the university.

     *Students under any status will be advised to undergo mentoring and may enroll in optional course audit/ remedial classes in order for them to have better chances to pass the subject.

Note:	Other requirements/ criteria prescribed by the PSG/CMO of the program and the concerned college may be applied.

2. Advanced Credits

     Advanced credits will be granted to college graduates who would wish to enroll another degree subject to the evaluation and endorsement of the program chair, college secretary, college dean, and registrar.

3. Residency

     The maximum number of years that a student is allowed to pursue an academic program shall be 1.5 times the prescribed number of years for the program.

     Based on the above, the prescribed number of years of residency are as follows:

Two - year course - 3.0 years Four - year course - 6.0 years Five - year course -  7.5 years Six - year course - 9.0 years

Note: Should the student exceed the prescribed maximum residency period, he/she shall no longer be allowed to re-enroll in the course except for highly justifiable/ valid reasons and for the completion of thesis, feasibility studies, project studies and other graduation requirements of similar nature subject to the approval of the President of the request of the student for extension through the dean/ campus head and the VP ARA after thorough evaluation of the merits of the request; however, he/she maybe allowed to enroll in other courses.

3.1 Transferees

Baccalaureate	-1-year residency

4. CLASSIFICATION OF STUDENTS

4.a.1. Regular student is one who carries the full semestral load required in his/her curriculum.
4.a.2. Irregular student is one who carries a different semestral load required in his/her curriculum.

4.a.3. Continuing Professional Education (CPE) student is one who has finished a degree program and is enrolled in education subjects in a given term.
4.a.4. ETEAAP (Expanded Tertiary Education and Equivalency Accreditation Program) student is one who attains educational assessment from non-formal and informal educational experiences.

5. CLASSIFICATION OF STUDENTS PER YEAR LEVEL

5.a. Freshman is one who is undergoing the first year curriculum or has not yet finished at least 25% of the total number of units prescribed in the curriculum.
5.b. Sophomore is one who has completed the prescribed subjects of the first year curriculum or has finished at least 25% of the total number of units required in thecurriculum.
5.c. Junior is one who has completed the prescribed subjects of the first two years of the curriculum or has finished at least 50% of the total number of units required in thecurriculum.
5.d. Senior is one who has completed the prescribed subjects of the first three years of the curriculum or has finished more than 75% of the total number of units required in the curriculum.

6. FUSING OF CLASSES

     The fusing of classes shall be determined by the Registrar in consultation with the Program Chair/ Dean/ Campus ARA Director concerned.

     Classes maybe fused with the same course description, number of units and class schedules in another course in consultation with the Registrar and Program Chair.

7. OFFERING OF UNPROGRAMMED SUBJECTS

7.a. Students who have failing grade/s or are irregular may request the offering of un-programmed subjects.
7.b. The unprogrammed subject may be opened regardless of the number of enrollees provided that there is a faculty who is willing to handle the subject.
7.c. Request must be made not later than two (2) weeks before the start of enrollment in every term.

8. ACADEMIC STATUS

     Students are classified according to academic status depending on their scholastic performance as follows:

8.a. Good standing - regular students who do not have any failing and/or incomplete grade.
8.b. Warning - students who failed in 25% of the total number of units enrolled during the semester. *
8.c. Probation - students who failed in 50% of the total number of units enrolled during the semester. *
8.d. Dismissed - students who failed in 75% but less than 100% of the total number of academic units enrolled during the semester will be dismissed from the program but may apply to enroll in another program. *
8.e. Permanent Disqualification - students who failed in 100% of the academic units enrolled during the semester will no longer be allowed to enroll in any program offered in all campuses of the university.

     *Students under any status will be advised to undergo mentoring and may enroll in optional course audit/ remedial classes in order for them to have better chances to pass the subject.

9. ACADEMIC LOAD

9.a. The maximum semestral academic load in the various programs shall be required for all regular students in all year levels.
9.b. A maximum of 27 units shall be allowed for graduating students except those under Education programs who are undergoing practice teaching, wherein they are only allowed to enroll a maximum of 12 units.

Note: Policies on the qualifications of students to undergo OJT/ Internship/ Field Practice in the Philippines may be referred to the Section 16 of CMO No. 104, s. 2017, and CMO No. 22, s. 2013 for Policies, Standards and Guidelines (PSGs) on Student Internship Abroad Program (SIAP).

10. ACADEMIC CREDIT SYSTEM

10.a. Generally, every lecture subject with a class meeting of three (3) hours a week is equivalent to three (3) credit units. A laboratory subject with a class meeting of three (3) hours a week is equivalent to one (1) credit unit, except for Nursing which is governed by CMO No. 14, s. 2009.
10.b. The sequence of subjects enrolled shall be in accordance with the approved curriculum. Subjects taken and completed without passing the pre-requisite subject shall not be credited.

11. SCHOOL TERMS

     The academic year is composed of three (3) terms: two (2) semesters with eighteen (18) weeks each, and one (1) mid-year term of six (6) weeks.

12. SUSPENSION OF CLASSES

     Classes may be suspended by proper authorities due to fortuitous events/ force majeure (natural calamities) or any other circumstances that might affect the safety of students.

13. SUMMATIVE EXAMINATION PERIODS

13.a. There shall be preliminary, midterm and final examinations of 1.5 hours per subject in every examination period, as per BOR approved school calendar, to be scheduled by the Registrar and to be approved by the Campus ARA.
13.b. The approved schedule must be strictly followed.
13.c. Integration period of one (1) day is required before the final examination to enable students to review and prepare for the examination.
13.d. Permits shall be signed by the concerned faculty or proctor during each examination (as applicable).
13.e. Laboratory examinations may be given one (1) week before the official schedule of summative examinations.

14. SPECIAL EXAMINATIONS

     Students may be allowed to take special examination with valid reasons:

14.a. Illness and accident duly certified by the attending physician or attested by the parents/ guardian;
14.b. Death of an immediate member of the family;
14.c. Force majeure/ natural calamities; and
14.d. Legal-related reasons.

15. CLASS ATTENDANCE

15.a. All students shall attend the prescribed number of hours in a subject.

15.b. Any student who is absent due to inevitable circumstances shall secure an excuse slip from the Guidance Office to be presented to the Instructor/ Professor. If absence is due to illness, a medical certificate is verified by the Campus/University Physician/ Nurse shall be submitted.
15.c. Student who incurs absences of more than 20% of the total number of lecture and laboratory hours in a term without valid reasons shall be dropped from the class roll.
15.d. A 15-minute tardiness shall be equivalent to one-hour period of absence.

16. CLASS SIZE

The recommended class size shall be as follows:

Lecture class	- 30-50 (tool or major subjects	- 25) Laboratory/Shop work	- 25-30 Science Laboratory	- 25-30

17. SUBSTITUTION OF SUBJECT

     The student may request for substitution of subject/s upon the recommendation of the subject specialist, Program/Department Chair subject to the approval of the Dean and the registrar.

18. GRADING SYSTEM

The following approved grading system shall be adopted


Percent EquivalentGradeDescription98 - 1001.00Excellent95 - 971.25Very Satisfactory92 - 941.50Satisfactory89 - 911.75Fairly Satisfactory86 - 882.00Good83 - 852.25Fairly Good80 - 822.50Fair77 - 792.75Below Fair75 - 763.00PassedIncompleteINC.Requirements not fully met74 and below5.00Failed

18.a. A grade of "5.0" means failed; re- enrollment of the subject is required.
18.b. An INC grade is given to a student whose class standing throughout the semester is passing but fails to satisfy any of the prescribed requirements by the subject teacher.
18.c. Students who incurred Incomplete grades after the issuance of Honorable Dismissal will no longer be allowed to complete even if the reglementary period of one (1) academic year for the completion has not yet lapsed.
18.d. For a student to be able to clear his/ her deficiencies, should be officially enrolled in the University.
18.e. Completion shall be made within one academic year otherwise the "Incomplete" mark shall automatically become "5.0".
18.f. Completion form shall be accomplished and filed at the
Registrar's Office.
18.g. Completion fee of Php. 50.00 per subject shall be paid at the
Cashier's Office

18.h. "Incomplete" mark will no longer be reflected on the TOR if completed and accomplished within the duration of one academic year.

19. GUIDELINES	FOR	CORRECTION OF	ENTRIES	IN THE SCHOLASTIC RECORDS OF STUDENTS

     The following guidelines shall apply to any request for the correction of entries in grade sheets, inadvertent non-inclusion of names of students and other erroneous entries in their scholastic records.
19.a. 	A request letter for correction of entry shall be filed by a faculty to the office of the Dean stating therein the facts of such erroneous entry. A filing fee amounting to Fifty Pesos (50.00/ student) shall be paid to the cashier by the subject teacher.
19.b. 	The faculty shall attach to his/her request the following documents: authenticated copy of the class record; and/or other pertinent documents to prove the claim such as, but not limited to, quizzes and test papers showing the result of examinations.
19.c. The Dean shall act on the request within five (5) working days from filing and submit his/her decision to the registrar. If the request is granted, the same shall be forwarded to the registrar to effect the correction. If the request is denied, the faculty may appeal within seven (7) working days from receipt of notice to the Executive Officer/Campus Administrator. The decision is final and non-appealable.
19.d. In campuses where no Dean is designated, the Department Chair shall assume the function of the Dean.
19.e. The filing of request for correction of entry shall be within a period of one (1) year from the date of submission of grade sheets to the Office of the Registrar.

20. ACADEMIC SCHOLARSHIP

20.a. University Scholar

     A university scholar is a student carrying at least 15 academic load required in his college who obtained a GWA of at least 1.50.

20.b. College Scholar

     A college scholar is a student carrying at least 15 academic load required in his college who obtained a GWA of at least 1.75.

21. GRADUATION WITH HONORS

Qualifications:

     A student who has completed his/her course within the prescribed period shall be qualified to graduate with honors as specified below. A candidate with honors shall have the following qualifications:

21.a. He/she shall have obtained any of the following General Weighted Average;

1.000 to 1.250	-Summa Cum Laude
1.251 to 1.500	-Magna Cum Laude
1.501 to 1.750	-Cum Laude

21.b. He/she has not been charged and found guilty of any of the major offenses governed by the existing university rules and regulations;
21.c. He/she has not incurred a grade below 2.50 in any of his/her enrolled academic or non-academic subjects, prescribed or not prescribed, which are taken within or outside the University;

21.d. If transferee, he/she has completed at least 75% of the total academic units required in his/her curriculum in the University, and
21.e. Must have taken the normal load or the prescribed number of credits in the curriculum in each semester which is not less than fifteen (15) units. However, for some meritorious cases such as health reasons (upon presentation of a medical certificate) and unavailability of subjects to be enrolled and except when it is the last semester of the student, he/she will be allowed a lighter academic load.
21.f. If any of the above provisions have different interpretations, then the interpretation not favoring the granting of the honor shall prevail. (BOR Resolution No. 75 s. 2014, effective Second Semester, SY 2014-2015).

22. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS

22.a. Application for Graduation
A candidate shall apply for graduation at the Registrar's Office through the College Secretary four (4) weeks after the first day of classes during his/her last semester.

22.b. Completion of Deficiencies
The candidate for graduation shall satisfactorily complete his/her deficiency/ies before the college/campus academic council meeting.

22.c. Residency
For transferees, the residency requirement shall be at least one (1) academic year prior to graduation.

23. COMMENCEMENT	EXERCISES,	BACCALAUREATE	SERVICES	AND HABILIMENTS

23.a. All graduating students shall be required to attend the commencement exercises and baccalaureate mass or ecumenical service.
23.b. Graduating students shall wear their prescribed academic gowns, caps and the corresponding hood and tassel colors during the baccalaureate service and commencement exercises:


Agriculture	&	other	related
programs- greenEducation- powder blueBusiness, Accountancy & Public Administration
- golden yellowEngineering- maroonArts & Sciences-	dark blueCriminal Justice Education-	redInformation and Communication Technology
- lilacVeterinary Medicine- grayNursing- apricotLaw- purpleFisheries- aqua blue
Note:	Candidates for non-degree programs are not required to wear hoods.

24. HONORABLE DISMISSAL

24.a. Honorable dismissal, which is a voluntary withdrawal from the University, shall be granted to students of good standing and who are cleared of money and property accountabilities.

24.b. Suspension or expulsion due to major offenses shall not entitle the student to honorable dismissal.
24.c. Graduates shall secure credentials and Certificate of Honorable Dismissal upon presentation of clearances and receipts of payments at the Registrar's Office.

25. MODES OF PAYMENT OF SCHOOL FEES

     The University strictly follows the provisions of RA 10931 for the modes of payment of school fees in accordance with Section 4, Section 6, and Section 7 of the Act. (Please refer to Appendix B, RA 10931 for the specific promulgation policies and guidelines governing Coverage, Exceptions to Free HE, and Benefits of the Act).
     Payment of school fees shall be made over the counter or online through the Land Bank of the Philippines.

25.a. Cash
25.b. Installment: The total assessed fees shall be paid on installment basis as prorated below:

35%-	upon enrolment35%-	Prelims20%-	Mid-term10%-	Finals
26. REFUND OF SCHOOL FEES

     Students who are covered with the RA 10931 as per Section 4, do not qualify for the refund of school fees.

     The percentages of refund of fees, except registration fee are as follows:

100%-	before the start of classes75%-	one week after the start of classes50%-	two weeks after the start of classes25%-	three weeks after the start of classes100%-	in case of death during the term

27. SCHOOL FEES

27.a.1. Tuition Fee	Php 100.00 / unit Medical/Health Course, Major Subjects, RLE Variable	Php 250.00 unit Law	Php 400.00 / unit
Developmental Programs	Php 100.00 / unit
Computer Laboratory	Php 450.00/subject
Technical Laboratory	Php 100.00/subject

27.a.2. Other Fees

Entrance (Freshmen/Transferees)
RegistrationPhp100.00
Php 50.00LibraryPhp100.00GuidancePhp 20.00Medical/DentalPhp 50.00SBO/SSC/SSCFPhp 60.00Student PublicationPhp 50.00JournalPhp 50.00AthleticsPhp 50.00P.E.Php200.00Socio-CulturalPhp 25.00NSTP-ROTC/CWTSPhp150.00F.A.L.P. (For C.A. Students Only)Php 20.00InternetPhp 40.00IDPhp100.00Mutual AidPhp 40.00FinePhp 50.00Student Development
First Year	Php500.00
Second Year	Php400.00
Third Year	Php300.00
Fourth/Fifth/Sixth Year	Php 200.00

27.a.3. Thesis Fee	Php 500.00 (to be paid at the college on prorated payments to the numbers of the advisory committee)

Note: As per Section 7, under Benefits of RA 10931, only the first copies/printouts of school ID, Library ID, and student handbook shall be free, and any subsequent requests by the student can be charged the usual fees.

27.b. Foreign Students
Tuition Fee	Php 600.00/unit Bachelor of Science in Nursing
Major Subjects	Php 600.00/unit
Minor Subjects	Php 400.00/unit
RLE	100% more than the
regular rate

Other Fees
Application	Php1,500.00 (for new students) Entrance /Admission	Php1,500.00 (for new students) Registration		Php 200.00
Library	Php 400.00
Guidance	Php 200.00
Medical & Dental	Php 300.00
SBO/SCC /SCF	Php 120.00
Student Publication	Php 100.00
Journal	Php 200.00
Athletics/Sports	Php 200.00
Socio-Cultural	Php 300.00
PE	Php400.00/subject
NSTP-ROTC/CWTS	Php 300.00
Internet	Php 200.00
ID	Php 200.00
Mutual Aid	Php 80.00
Fine	Php 400.00
Diploma	Php 300.00
Transcript of Records	Php 100.00/page

Student Development
First Year	Php 1,000.00
Second Year	Php 800.00
Third Year	Php 600.00
     Fourth Year	Php 400.00 Laboratory fees
Computer	Php 1000.00/subject
Technical	Php 500.00/subject
Medical/Health	Php 400.00/subject

28. SCHOOL UNIFORM

     Wearing of the following prescribed University uniforms shall be strictly enforced to students at all times within the campus.

28.a. Official School Uniform / ID Monday - Friday	School ID
28.a.1. MALE:


Monday,	Tuesday,	and
Thursday-White	Polo	with	ISU	seal
patch on the left chest
-Black straight-cut pants
-Close black leather shoes and black socksWednesday-Ordinary attireFriday-Organization uniformNote: Hair style- Barber cut
28.a.2. FEMALE


Monday and Thursday-White	long	sleeve	blouse
with necktieTuesday-White	short-sleeve	blouse with ribbon
-Gianpolycheck	A-cut	skirt below the knee
-Close black leather shoesWednesday-Ordinary attireFriday-Organization uniform

28.b. OJT Uniform

OJT students (program-based)

28.c. P.E. Uniform

     All P.E. students shall wear the prescribed University P.E. uniform during P.E. classes only.

29. Identification Card

All students shall wear official school I.D at all times while in the
campus. The said I.D. shall be validated every term in the Registrar's Office.

30. Cash Incentives for Merit Scholars and Student Leaders.
Board Resolution No. 65, s. 2018
(Please refer to Appendix D, IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE CASH INCENTIVES FOR MERIT SCHOLARS AND LEADERS)


MATRIX OF CASH INCENTIVESSCHOLARSHIPCASH INCENTIVES / SEMESTEREntrance Scholarship
a. With highest honor
(average grade of 98 to 100%)
a. ? 3, 000. 00Academic Scholarshipa. Universitya. ? 3, 000. 00b. Collegeb. ? 2, 000. 00Assistance to Athletesa. ? 1, 500. 00 (National Level)
b. ? 1, 500. 00 (Regional Level)
c. ? 1, 500. 00 (University Level)Publication Scholarshipa. Editor-in-Chief (EIC)a. ? 3, 000. 00b. Associate Editor-in-Chiefb. ? 2, 000. 00c. Section Editor, Layout Artist,c. ? 1, 500. 00Cartoonistd. Official Writersd. ? 1, 000. 00Socio-Cultural Scholarshipa. ? 1, 500. 00 (National Level)
b. ? 1, 500. 00 (Regional / Provincial Level)
c. ? 1, 000. 00 (University Level)Campus SSC Officersa. Chairpersona. ? 2, 000. 00b. Vice Chairpersonb. ? 1, 500. 00c. Secretaryc. ? 1, 500. 00d. Treasurerd. ? 1, 500. 00e. Auditore. ? 1, 500. 00
f. Accountant
g. SBO President
h. ROTC Officers:
* Corp Commander
* Other Officersf. ? 1, 500. 00
g. ? 1, 500. 00

* ? 2, 000. 00
* ? 1, 500. 00
31. PROVISION OF MONETARY INCENTIVES TO NATIONAL BOARD TOPNOTCHERS.
Approved as per Board Resolution No. 66, s. 2018.
     The following are guidelines on the provision of monetary incentives to Board National Topnotchers:
1. Cash incentives shall be given to national topnotchers in the PRC Board Examinations.
2. The cash incentives shall be allocated from the tuition fees billfrom the UniFAST.
3. A Topnotcher shall bring pertinent documents to vouch his/her award (i.e. Certification of Rating from PRC, screenshot/printout of Top Ten from the official website of PRC, etc.).
4. Incentives shall be released after processing all necessary documents (i.e. budget utilization request, voucher,etc.).
5. Cash incentives for the national placers of the boardexamination are as follows:
PLACE	CASH INCENTIVES

160,000.00255,000.00350,000.00445,000.00540,000.00635,000.00730,000.00825,000.00920,000.001015,000.00
6. Cash incentives for the regional placers of the board examination are as follows:

PLACE	CASH INCENTIVES

1-210,000.003-48,000.005-66,000.007-84,000.009-102,000.00
7. As supporting documents, the names of regional topnotchers should be properly certified by the PRC Regional Office since these are not normally published in newspaper of National/Regional circulation nor uploaded in the PRC website.
8. The college from where the topnotchers came from should facilitate the preparation and processing of vouchers and checks.
9. Topnotchers can collect only once for a specific program, the higher amount.
10. Topnotchers in any two or three examinations can still be covered by this resolution.

32. UTILIZATION OF STUDENT MUTUAL AID FUND

Section1.	General Coverage

     All bonafide students of the University shall be entitled to avail of the mutual aid benefits.

Section 2. Contribution

     All students shall pay a contribution of P40.00 upon enrollment during the first semester of the school year. Whether or not the student is enrolled for the second semester or during summer, the amount paid covers the benefits for one school year.
     In case the student is enrolled only during the second semester, he/she shall pay P20.00 only.

Section3.	Nature of claims	Benefits






3.4.	Indemnity due to university









Section 4. Procedures in claiming benefits

4.1. Submit to the Office of the Student Affairs and Services (OSAS) a written report of the accident and same shall be forwarded to the Accounting Office for the preparation of disbursement vouchers.

4.2. Submit required documents such as the following:

4.2.1. In case of death due to natural causes:
4.2.1.1. Death Certificate
4.2.1.2. 	Certificate	of	enrollment	signed	by	the Registrar

4.2.2. In case of accident (not related to school activities):
4.2.2.1. Police report/Barangay report
4.2.2.2. Medical Certificate & Hospital Bills
4.2.2.3. Certificate	of	Enrolment	signed	by	the Registrar

4.2.3. School-related accidents:
4.2.3.1. Written report of the Office of the Student Affairs and Services or University officials (i.e. Faculty spot report, Dean's report, Adviser's report or Project In-Charge report, etc.).
4.2.3.2. Medical certificate & hospital bills.
4.2.3.3. Certificate of Enrollment signed by the Registrar.
4.2.3.4. Other documents as may be required in compliance to the existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

Note: A separate account as trust fund shall be opened in the university official depository bank where the amount collected for the mutual aid fund shall be deposited and withdrawn.

33. STUDENT LOAN ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

Under the IRR of the University Development Fee.

a. A bonafide student may be entitled to a loan privilege through the University Student Loan Assistance Program.
b. The student shall be granted a maximum loan amount of P 2,500.00 for payment of tuition and miscellaneous fees only within but not beyond the midterm period.
c. The amount of loan by the student shall be paid directly to the cashier and shall be credited to his/her tuition fee account.
d. Other forms of loan may be availed of by students subject to the IRR of the Student Loan Assistance Program.
e. The student shall pay the amount loaned with an interest rate of one percent (1%) per semester which shall be paid in equal weekly/monthly basis within five (5) months or before the end of the semester.
f. The adviser of every class shall be furnished a copy of the list of students who were granted loan under this program and shall closely

monitor and remind the said students to pay on instalment on a weekly/monthly basis.
g. The loan assistance program shall become effective only after three
(3) days upon approval of the mutual aid program or as may be determined by the President through the recommendation of the Committee.
h. The Board of Regents shall determine when to declare the accumulated earning realized through the mutual aid and student loan program available for reprogramming for university projects. Provided that, all income realized shall be programmed or utilized for projects where students are directly benefited.
i. Procedures: Students who are willing to avail of the loan program shall file their application to the campus student services office. The campus Office of the Student Affairs and Services (OSAS) shall process the application and submit the same to the university/campus accounting office for the payment of the loan.

34. STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS

     The University strongly adheres to a credible, competent, and responsive leadership. For this purpose, the students are encouraged to organize and actively participate in any or various duly recognized student organizations.

     The Student Organization Unit of the Office of Student Affairs and Services serves as the coordinating center of the University. The specific promulgation policies and guidelines governing student organizations form part of Appendix E.

Establishment and Operation

    The establishment and operation of any student organization in the campus, or in the colleges/departments shall be governed by the rules and regulations of the Office of Student Affairs and Services such as the following:

1. Authority to Operate

     Student organizations shall have to be duly recognized by the OSAS before they can operate or conduct activities.

2. Supervision of Student Activities

     It shall be the responsibility of the Director of Student Affairs and Services and the Chief of Student Organizations to supervise all the activities of all duly recognized student organizations.

3. Application for Recognition

a. New Organization

     Any group of at least fifteen (15) students may apply to the OSAS to form an organization. The letter of application shall be accompanied by the following:

a.1. Constitution and By-Laws;
a.2. List of elected officers and members for the current year;
a.3. Proposed program of activities and projects;
a.4. Names of three (3) Faculty or Employees with their letter of acceptance as advisers to be submitted to the Director of OSAS.

b. Renewal of recognized organizations/clubs

     To be eligible for renewal, the organization shall submit all the requirements including accomplishment reports of the preceding school year of operation.

c. Conditions for non-recognition/non-renewal of a student organization:

c.1. Requirements for recognition and/or renewal are not met;
c.2. Sanction is still in force;
c.3. Failure	to	meet	the	deadline	for	filing	of recognition/renewal set by the OSAS.

4. Certificate of Recognition

     The recognition of a student organization shall be a pre-condition for its operation in the University. A corresponding Certificate of Recognition shall be issued by the OSAS upon the recommendation of the Dean of the College where the organization operates. However, such certificate shall only be effective for one (1) school year subject for renewal every school year.

5. Membership

     Membership to an organization shall be determined by the organization itself as embodied in its constitution and by-laws.

6. Qualification of Candidates

     Election procedures and filing of candidacy for any position in any organization shall be in conformity with the provisions of its constitution.

7. Conduct of Student Activities

     All organizations shall be required to file an Activity Permit within five (5) working days before their scheduled activity with complete attachments such as the action plan, communications, training proposal/ activity proposal and program or invitation.

8. Nature of Activity

    Organizations are encouraged to conduct relevant activities which are focused on the following areas: educational, religious/moral, social, cultural, entrepreneurial, environmental, financial matters, etc.

Chapter IV

OFFICE OF STUDENT AFFAIRS AND SERVICES
(Based on CMO No. 9, s 2013)

     The Office of Student Affairs and Services provides sets of services that support academic experiences of students in order to attain holistic student development.

The University implements the following student services:

1. Student Welfare Services

     These are basic services and programs needed to ensure and promote the well-being of students. These include Information, Orientation and Awareness, Guidance and Counseling, Career and Placement, Economic Enterprise Development, and Student Handbook Development.

a. Information and Orientation Services

    These are informative activities and materials designed to facilitate student adjustment to life in tertiary/higher education.

a.1. Information and Orientation Services

     This service consists of information materials on institutional mission, vision and goals, academic, rules and regulations, student conduct and discipline, student programs, services and facilities and such other information necessary for student development and should be made available to all students.

     It also includes regular comprehensive orientation program held for new and continuing students responsive to their needs, including orientation on the dynamics and nature of persons with disabilities, and relevant laws and policies affecting persons with disabilities.

     An organized, updated, and readily available educational, career, and personal/social materials in different accessible formats are also provided to students. Information materials include statutes affecting students such as (a) R. A. 9262 or Anti-Violence Against Women and Children Act; (b) guidelines on drug abuse prevention and control, (c)
R.A. 7877 or the Anti-Sexual Harassment Act of 1995, (d) HIV AIDS awareness, (e) self-care and healthy lifestyles and (f) R. A. 9442, particularly on the provision on public ridicule and vilification against persons with disability.

b. Guidance and Counseling Services

b.1. Guidance Service - a set of services using an integrated approach to the development of well-functioning individuals primarily by helping them to utilize their potentials to the fullest.
b.2. Counseling - individual or group intervention designed to facilitate positive change in student behavior, feelings and attitudes.
b.3. Appraisal - gathering of information about students through the use of psychological tests and non-psychometric devices.
b.4. Follow-up - a system of monitoring to determine the effectiveness of guidance activities, in general, and placement in particular.
b.5. Referral - refers to coordination of multi-disciplinary team of specialists to ensure that special needs of students are met.

c. Career and Job Placement Services

    These	refer	to	the	assistance	provided	for	vocational	and occupational		fitness and employment.

d. Economic Enterprise Development

    It refers to those services and programs that would cater to the other needs of students such as but not limited to 1) student cooperatives, 2) entrepreneurial, 3) income generating projects, and 4) savings.

e. Student Handbook Development

    This refers to the development/updating of student handbook for dissemination, information, and guidance of students and university stakeholders.

2. Student Development

     These are programs and activities designed for the enhancement and deepening of leadership skills and social responsibility, which include Student Organizations and Activities, Professional organization or societies, special interests, leadership training programs, student council/government, Student Discipline/Government, student discipline, Student Publication/media.

a. Student Activities - supervision, recognition, and monitoring of student organizations and their activities such as leadership programs, student publication, student organizations, sports development, volunteerism, peer helper program, etc.
b. Student Organizations and Activities - refer to the recognition/accreditation, supervision and monitoring of student groups including the evaluation of their activities.
c. Leadership Training - are programs and opportunities to develop and enhance leadership effectiveness in the personal level and student organizations.
d. Student Council/Government - refers to the student body duly organized and elected at large by the students themselves, with due recognition and authority from the university, as the students' official representative in matters affecting them.

e. Student Discipline - refers to the judicious implementation of institutional rules and regulations governing student behavior and conduct.
f. Student Publication/Yearbook - refers to the official publication/organ/journal/yearbook and such other student- oriented print and non-print media of the university and/or college.

3. Institutional Student Programs and Services

     These are programs and activities offered by the university to facilitate the delivery of essential services to the students that include admission, scholarship and financial assistance, food, health and security, housing and residential services, multi-faith, foreign/international students, services for students with special needs and other programs such as: culture and arts, sports, social and community involvement.

a. Admission Services. These are services that take care of the
processing of students' entrance and requirements.

b. Services for Students with Special Needs and Persons with Disabilities. These are programs and activities designed to provide equal opportunities to Persons with Disabilities, indigenous peoples, solo parents, etc. (academic accommodation for learners with special needs like left handed students must be provided with arm chair in the classroom suited to their condition).

c. Library Services. The Library, being the repository of knowledge of the University, provides and supports the instructional, research and curricular needs of students.

Library Policies, Rules and Regulations

c.1. Library Hour

     The library is open from Monday to Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and on Saturday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.

c.2. Admission to the Library

     All bonafide students, campus officials, faculty and employees of the University and other institutions including private individuals are granted permission by the librarian to use the library facilities.

c.3. Requirements for Library Use

     All students shall present the official school ID and Library card for them to be allowed to use the library facilities. The school ID shall be non - transferable and shall be worn upon entry to the library.

c.4. Outside Researchers

     Walk-in users from other institutions shall present a valid ID and a referral letter from their respective heads of institutions.

d. Health Services. The university medical and dental services shall be headed by the University Physician who is in-charge of the health needs of students and University personnel and staff. The University Physician, together with the Dentists and Nurses, shall conduct a medical-dental examination to all new students as a requirement for admission. Medical and dental consultation and treatment may be availed of anytime during school days. First dosage of medicines is given free as long as

stocks are available. Dental extraction and prophylaxis are included in the dental services.

e. Multi-faith Services. The university provides an environment conducive to free expression of one's religious orientation in accordance with institutional principles and policies.

f. Student Housing and Residential Services. The University provides housing facilities which shall be equipped and maintained at an affordable price. Separate dormitories for male and female occupants are managed by dormitory matrons who supervise as well as extend counseling services to all dormitory occupants. This unit is also in-charge of regular monitoring of private boarding houses outside the campus.

g. Food Services. The University leases spaces for canteens or cafeterias which provide meals, snacks, school supplies, and grocery items at reasonable prices. The University, through the Medical Unit, monitors the sanitation and safety of the foods served.

h. Sports and Socio-Cultural Services. The University acknowledges the need of students to become physically and socially active and competent individuals through sports and socio - cultural activities hence, it implements and encourages programs and activities for the holistic development of students.

i. Safety and Security Services. The Security provides safety and security to all students, University staff and personnel and university properties. It enforces traffic rules and regulations and maintains peace and order within the campus.

j. Social and Community Involvement Programs. The university provides programs and opportunities designed to develop

social awareness, personal internalization and meaningful contribution to nation-building.

k. Foreign/International Student Services. The university provides assistance to address the needs of foreign students.

l. Scholarships and Financial Assistance Services (SFAS). The University offers several scholarship and assistance programs to deserving students. The selection of grantees is in accordance with the policies and guidelines of the university and the sponsoring agencies.

     The Scholarship Unit of the Office of Student Affairs and Services takes charge of processing and monitoring of all scholarships and other grants which are classified as:
A. Merit Scholarship. Exemplary / meritorious scholastic performance of a student or by virtue of his impressive talents and skills that contribute to the academic community.

1. Entrance Scholarship. This is given to entering freshmen who graduated with highest honors with an average grade of 98 to 100% from a public or private high school. It is availed for one semester only.

2. University Scholarship. This is given to a student who obtained a GWA of at least 1.5 at the end of a regular term and who carries at least 15 academic load for the term.

3. College Scholarship. This is given to a student who obtained a GWA of at least 1.75 at the end of a regular term and who carries at least 15 academic load for the term.

4. Sports/Athletic Scholarship. This is awarded to athletes who:

5.1. Carry a minimum academic load of 15 units;

5.2. Have not incurred a failing or incomplete grade, and
5.3. Have participated in or won in the University/Campus sports competition during the preceding semester and have been qualified to represent the University in higher athletic competitions.

5. Student Publication Scholarship. This is awarded to the campus student publication staff who have a minimum academic load of 15 units/semester and have no failing or incomplete grade in the preceding semester.

6. Socio-cultural Scholarship. The scholarship is awarded to students who are members of the socio-cultural group and who have won in the regional/national competitions, who carry a minimum academic load of 15 units and have no failing or incomplete grade in the preceding semester.

7. Student Leaders and ROTC Officers. This is awarded to the Campus SSC, SBO, and ROTC Officers who have a minimum academic load of 15 units/semester and have no failing or incomplete grade in the preceding semester.

RIGHTS OF THE STUDENTS

     As reflected in Appendix F, every student of the University shall enjoy certain rights subject to limitations as prescribed by law and the university policies and regulations.

DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF STUDENTS

Every student shall:

1. Love God, country, and his/her fellowmen.
2. Live a meaningful and productive life.
3. Observe the University Code of Student Conduct.

4. Develop his/her skills, capacities, and talents in pursuit of academic excellence.
5. Respect the Filipino flag and all that upholds and symbolizes the country.
6. Respect the customs and traditions, the laws of the land, and the rules and policies of the University.
7. Uphold the dignity of the institution by exhibiting proper decorum at all times in all places.
8. Uphold the academic and moral integrity of the institution by trying to achieve excellence and moral uprightness.
9. Promote and preserve the peace and order in the University by observing the rules on discipline and establish harmonious relationship with fellow students, faculty, staff, and other stakeholders of the University.
10. Promote general welfare by actively participating in civic and socio- cultural affairs.

STUDENT CONDUCT AND DISCIPLINE

     ISU students are expected to observe the Code of Conduct at all times. (Please see Appendix G.)

BASIC DISCIPLINE

     Students shall strictly observe the laws of the land and the rules and regulations of the University. All students shall uphold the academic integrity which states that, "All persons involved in the educational programs and services of the University as student, teacher, researcher, staff, or academic administrator shall uphold honesty and integrity in their academic activities at all times." In this regard, students shall avoid acts such as falsification, cheating, plagiarism, deceit, misinterpretation, and fabrication of facts and records, bribery, and all forms of dishonesty.

PENALTIES

Section 1. General Provisions

1.1. The Director/Chief of the OSAS shall determine, recommend, and impose appropriate penalties after due process taking into account the following:

1.1.1. Nature and gravity of offense;
1.1.2. Previous record of misconduct/establish precedents;
1.1.3. Position or status of the aggrieved party;
1.1.4. Pertinent	and	applicable	aggravating	and	mitigating circumstances.

1.2. Students who are certified by the OSAS as violator of major offenses shall be subjected to corresponding disciplinary actions after due process.

Section 2. The following are classified as major and minor offenses:

2.1. Minor Offenses

2.1.1. Failure to wear proper uniform, complete uniform
2.1.2. Possession and passing of pornographic materials in print and non-printed materials
2.1.3. Littering/unsanitary acts
2.1.4. Loitering
2.1.5. Eating in restricted areas like library, computer laboratories and other laboratories
2.1.6. Unauthorized use of school facilities
2.1.7. Lending/ borrowing of Identification Card
2.1.8. Driving without license/unregistered vehicle/violation of traffic rules inside the campus like over speeding and noisy mufflers as reiterated in RA 8749 or the Clean Air Act "regulating and controlling emissions of unwanted sound of a known source passed into the atmosphere".

2.2. Major Offenses

2.2.1. Possession and use of alcoholic drinks and prohibited drugs and deadly weapons and explosives or anything ordinary objects that are abused or misused
2.2.2. Smoking as reiterated in RA 8749
2.2.3. Disrespect
2.2.4. Vandalism in all areas/ facility of the campus
2.2.5. Dishonesty/cheating/ forgery/falsification
2.2.6. Creating barricades/obstructions
2.2.7. Assaults/physical injuries/verbal abuse in all forms and medium: oral, social media, text messages
2.2.8. Hazing
2.2.9. Harassment and sexual abuse/acts of lasciviousness
2.2.10. Use of unauthorized software and electronic gadgets
2.2.11. Involvement in unrecognized sorority/ fraternity
2.2.12. Gambling
2.2.13. Public	display	of	affection	or	intimacy,	indecent	or immoral acts like scandalous videos
2.2.14. Possession	and	distribution	of	offensive/subversive materials
2.2.15. Grave threats
2.2.16. Inciting to fight/sedition
2.2.17. Conducting activity without approval of the	OSAS and misrepresenting the University in student activities
2.2.18. Bullying

Section 3. Penalties

3.1. For Minor Offenses

3.3.1. First offense: reprimand and apology, promissory letter, restitution, summons for parent/s guardian/s.
3.3.2. Second offense: suspension from one (1) to four (4) days, community service as determined by the Office of Student Affairs and Services.

3.3.3. Third offense: treated as major offense.

3.2. For Major Offenses

3.2.1. First offense: suspension from five (5) to ten (10) days or Community Service, as determined by the Office of Student Affairs and Services.
3.2.2. Second offense: suspension from eleven (11) to fifteen (15) days.
3.2.3. Third offense: suspension to forty-five (45) calendar days to dismissal depending upon the gravity of the offense after due process.

Section 4. When the offense is committed by a non-bonafide student within the University, and with the involvement of ISU student/s, the latter shall be accountable for the acts of the former.

Section 5. The parents/ guardians of the offender shall always attend meetings and counselling to know their children's behavioural gross misconduct.

Section 6. Any student not enrolled at the time he/she is charged but refuses to be under jurisdiction of the University, his/her succeeding enrollment in any College/Campus of the University shall be withheld pending resolution of his/her case.

Section 7. The imposition of the disciplinary sanctions for the violation of any rule under this Code shall not prevent the University from endorsing the case to proper government authorities when the same may involve violations of penal laws.

Section 8. Policies issued from time to time by the University President on matters not covered in this handbook shall form an integral part of these guidelines.

Section 9. Previous policies, rules and regulations on student organizations enforced before the effectivity of this handbook are hereby superseded by these guidelines.

Section 10. Policies issued by the Student Government with regard to student activities in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and By-Laws shall form an integral part of these guidelines.

DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS

a. Any violation of the Code of Conduct shall subject the student to appropriate disciplinary actions and due process in accordance with the policies and procedures of the University.
b. Any person who allegedly committed academic infractions shall be given a chance to explain and defend his/her side.
c. For an aggrieved student, a written complaint on the incident shall be submitted to the Department Chair or Dean indicating the date, time, subject and nature of offense. The Dean shall impose appropriate actions.
d. If the aggrieved party is a faculty or employee, complaints or charges shall be resolved by the Human Resource Management Office (HRMO) in accordance with established rules and regulations of the University.
e. In the case of a campus or university official, complaints shall be forwarded to the VP-ARA who shall be responsible for appropriate action.

COMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATION/APPEAL

Section 1. The Office of Student Affairs Services shall create a committee on investigation which shall be composed of the Director/ Chief of Student Services, Director of Instruction/ ARA, two senior faculties and the SSC President of the campus.

The committee shall conduct investigation and collect pieces of evidence that may be used as bases of their findings and recommendations. Any appeal may be addressed to the Campus Head or University President who may likewise creates a Committee on Appeals which shall be tasked to review the findings of the committee on investigation and makes final recommendations on the case.

Section 2. No disciplinary proceedings shall be instituted except for conduct prohibited by law or by the rules and regulations promulgated by a duly constituted authority of the university.

2.1. A disciplinary proceeding shall be instituted upon:

2.1.1. Filing of written complaint under oath by the student complainant to the Office of Student Affairs and Services;
2.1.2. Submission of official report about the violation of existing rules and regulations.

2.2. There shall be an official entry book for the purpose of specifying the person charged, the complainant and his/her witnesses and the substance of the charge.

Section 3. In instances where the dispute is between a student and a faculty or employee, with the student as the respondent, the case shall be handled by the OSAS.

Section 4. In cases where the faculty or staff is the respondent, the members of the committee shall be appointed by the Director of Instruction/ARA.

Section 5. In instances where the dispute is between or among students, the case shall be handled by a special committee which is composed of OSAS Chief/Director, SSC Adviser, SSC President, CCL Chief Justice and CCL Speaker of the House.

Section 6. In instances where the dispute is between or among students of the different campuses, the case shall be handled by the University Student Tribunal which composes of SSCF officers, SSC Chief Justices and SSC Speakers of the House.

     Appendix A ACADEMIC PROGRAMS

Section I. CURRICULAR PROGRAMS

1. The University shall offer curricular programs that are in consonance with the regional and national development thrusts of the government.
2. A Curriculum Review and Evaluation Committee in the University/Campus/College levels shall periodically assess the responsiveness of curricular offerings, propose necessary revisions, and/or offering of new programs.
3. All curricular programs shall be subjected to periodic accreditation by accrediting bodies to ensure the promotion of quality and excellence.
4. The University shall have the power to confer degrees, certificates and titles in the different academic programs.
5. As per BOR resolution No. 58, s. 2018, 93 curricular programs of the ISU were approved for revisions.


ECHAGUE CAMPUSSchool of Veterinary MedicineDoctor of Veterinary MedicineCollege of AgricultureBachelor of Science in Animal Husbandry Bachelor of Science in Agriculture
Major in:
Crop Science/ Agronomy Soil Science
Animal Science Agricultural Economics Horticulture
Organic Agriculture
Bachelor of Science in Agribusiness Major in:
Agribusiness Management
Bachelor of Science in Forestry (First and Second year)
Bachelor of Science in Environmental Science
(First and Second year)College of Arts and SciencesBachelor of Science in Biology
Bachelor of Science in Mathematics Bachelor of Science in Psychology
Bachelor of Arts in English Language Studies Bachelor of Arts in CommunicationCollege	of	Criminal Justice EducationBachelor of Science in CriminologyInstitute of FisheriesBachelor of Science in FisheriesCollege of Business, Accountancy and Public AdministrationBachelor of Science in Business Administration Major in:
Human Resource Management Marketing Management Cooperative and Business Economics
Bachelor of Science in Hospitality Management Bachelor of Science in Tourism Management Bachelor in Public Administration
Bachelor of Science in Accountancy
Bachelor of Science in Management Accounting
Bachelor of Science in EntrepreneurshipCollege of EngineeringBachelor of Science in Agricultural and Biosystems Engineering
Bachelor of Science in Civil EngineeringCollege of Computing Studies,	Information
and Communication TechnologyBachelor of Science in Information Technology Bachelor of Science in Information Systems
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science Computer SecretarialCollege of NursingBachelor of Science in NursingCollege of EducationBachelor of Elementary Education Bachelor of Secondary Education
Major in:
English Filipino Mathematics Social Studies Science
      Library and Information Management Bachelor of Physical Education
Bachelor of Technology and Livelihood EducationSpecial ProgramsExpanded	Tertiary	Education	and	Equivalency Accreditation Program (ETEEAP)
Bachelor of Science in Agriculture Bachelor of Secondary Education
SANTIAGO CITY EXTENSIONBachelor of Science in Agriculture (First and Second year)
Bachelor of Science in Information Technology
JONES CAMPUSBachelor of Science in Agriculture Major in:
Crop Science Animal Science Organic Agriculture
Bachelor of Science in Information Technology Bachelor of Secondary Education
Major in:
English
Bachelor of Elementary Education
Bachelor of Science in Criminology
ANGADANAN CAMPUSBachelor of Secondary Education Major in:
Mathematics Filipino
Bachelor of Science in Industrial Technology Major in:
Automotive Technology Electrical Technology Electronics Technology
Foods and Service Management Welding and Fabrication Technology
Heating, Ventilating and Air-conditioning Tech.
Bachelor of Technical Vocational Teacher Education Major in:
Automotive Technology
      Foods and Service Management Bachelor of Science in Criminology
Bachelor of Science in Information Technology
Bachelor of Science in Hospitality Management Associate in Hotel and Restaurant Management
CAUAYAN CITY CAMPUSCollege of LawJuris DoctorCollege of Computing Studies,	Information
and Communication TechnologyBachelor of Science in Information Technology Bachelor of Science in Computer ScienceSchool of ArtsBachelor of Arts in English Language Studies Bachelor of Arts in Political Science
Bachelor of Science in Legal ManagementCollege	of	Criminal Justice EducationBachelor of Science in CriminologyCollege of EducationBachelor of Secondary Education Major in:
English Filipino Mathematics Science Social Studies
Bachelor of Elementary EducationCollege	of	Business and ManagementBachelor of Science in Entrepreneurship Bachelor of Science in Business Administration
Major in:
Financial Management
Bachelor of Science in Accounting Technology Bachelor of Science in Hospitality ManagementInstitute	of
Agricultural
TechnologyBachelor of Agricultural Technology Diploma in Agricultural TechnologyPolytechnic SchoolBachelor of Science in Industrial Technology Major in:
Automotive Electronics
Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Technology Electrical Technology
Three - Year Mechanical Technology Two - Year Automotive Technology Two - Year Electronics Technology Two - Year Electrical Technology
Associate in Aircraft Maintenance Technology



SAN MATEO CAMPUSBachelor of Science in Information Technology Bachelor of Technical Vocational Teacher Education
Major in:
Electrical Technology Electronics Technology Garments Fashion and Design
Bachelor of Secondary Education Major in:
Mathematics Social Science
Bachelor in Agricultural Technology
Diploma in Agricultural Technology
ROXAS CAMPUSInstitute	of
Information	and Communication
TechnologyBachelor of Science in Information TechnologyCollege of EducationBachelor of Secondary Education Major in:
Filipino MathematicsCollege	of	Criminal
Justice EducationBachelor of Science in CriminologyProvincial Institute of FisheriesBachelor of Science in FisheriesSchool of Agriculture and AgribusinessBachelor of Science in Agriculture Major in:
Organic Agriculture Animal Science Entomology
Bachelor of Science in Agribusiness Major in:
Agribusiness Management
ILAGAN CITY CAMPUSCollege of EducationBachelor of Technical Vocational Teacher Education Major in:
Automotive Technology
Electrical Technology
Electronics Technology
      Food and Service Management Bachelor of Secondary Education
Major in:
Science Mathematics English
Bachelor of Technology & Livelihood Education
Bachelor of Science in PsychologyCollege of NursingBachelor of Science in NursingSchool of MidwiferyBachelor of Science in Midwifery Midwifery (2 years)College	of
Engineering, Architecture	and TechnologyBachelor of Arts in Architecture
Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering Bachelor of Science in Information Technology Bachelor of Science in Industrial Technology
Major in:
Automotive Technology Electrical Technology Electronics Technology Foods Technology Drafting Technology Garments Technology Cosmetology
Building Construction
SAN MARIANO CAMPUSBachelor of Agricultural Technology Bachelor of Secondary Education
Major in:
Science English Mathematics
Bachelor of Science in Forestry (First and Second year) Bachelor of Science in Hospitality Management
Bachelor of Science in Information Technology Diploma in Agricultural Technology
CABAGAN CAMPUSCollege of EducationBachelor of Elementary Education Bachelor of Secondary Education
Major in:
Social Studies Mathematics English Science Filipino
Bachelor of Physical Education Major in:
School Physical EducationInstitute of Business ManagementBachelor of Science in Hospitality Management Associate in Hotel Restaurant Management Bachelor of Science in AgribusinessProvincial	Technical Institute		of
AgricultureBachelor of Science in Agriculture Major in:
Sugarcane Agronomy Agricultural Entrepreneurship Agronomy and Horticulture Animal Science
Farm Machinery Organic Agriculture Post-Harvest
Bachelor of Agricultural Technology Diploma in Agricultural TechnologyCollege		of	Forestry and	Environmental
ManagementBachelor of Science in Forestry
Bachelor of Science in Environmental ScienceCollege	of
Development Communication	and Arts and SciencesBachelor of Science in Development Communication Bachelor of Science in Biology
Bachelor of Arts in Sociology
Bachelor of Science in Information Technology
Bachelor of Science in Computer Science Bachelor of Science in Computer EngineeringCollege	of	Criminal Justice EducationBachelor of Science in Criminology
Bachelor of Science in Law Enforcement Administration
PALANAN EXTENSIONBachelor of Science in Agriculture Bachelor of Elementary Education Bachelor of Science in Fisheries
Bachelor of Science in Information Technology



Appendix B
Excerpt from Republic Act No. 10931, known as the "Universal Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act 2017"
RULE II -FREE HIGHER EDUCATION (HE) IN SUCS AND LUCS

     Section 4. Coverage. All Filipino students, in all courses leading to a bachelor's degree shall be exempt from paying tuition and other school fees for units enrolled provided they qualify under the admission and retention requirements of the University.

     Section 6. Exceptions to Free HE. The following students are ineligible to avail of Free Higher Education:
1. Students who have already obtained a Bachelor's degree or
comparable undergraduate degree from any public or private HEI;
2. Students who fail to comply with the admission and/or retention policies of the SUCs or LUCs, provided that the failure to comply with the SUC or LUC's retention policies results in the student's permanent disqualification from enrolling in any SUC or LUC;
3. Students who fail to complete their bachelor's degree or comparable undergraduate degree within a year after the period prescribed in their program:

a. Provided that in case of shiftees, any semester wherein the student has availed of the benefits of free higher education will be subtracted from the expected duration of the current program in which the student is enrolled;
b. Provided further, that in the case of transferees, any semester wherein the student has availed of any form of government- funded StuFAP shall be subtracted from the expected duration of the current program in which the student is enrolled;
c. Provided further, that in the case of returning students and other students who went on a Leave of Absence (LOA), the determination and the computation of their free higher education benefit shall be without prejudice to the most expedient way of completing their studies;

d. Provided finally, that the SUCs and LUCs shall decide on the cases that merit the extension of the availment of free higher education; and

4. 	Students who voluntary opt out of the free higher education provision.

     Student who are not eligible to avail of the Free Higher Education provision shall be charged tuition and other school fees as determined by the Governing Boards of the SUCs and LUCs.

     Section 7. Benefits. All students availing themselves of the free higher education provision shall be entitled to:

1. Free tuition for all courses/subjects/classes enrolled during a particular semester/term, as part of the curriculum and is essential to obtaining a degree. This includes approved petitioned classes, but not non-credit within-semester tutorial or review classes, nor review and enhancement classes offered by HEI;
2. Free miscellaneous other school fees, and similar or related fees, which include:
a. Library fees;
b. Computer fees;
c. Laboratory fees;
d. School ID fees;
e. Athletic fees;
f. Admission fees;
g. Development fees;
h. Guidance fees;
i. Handbook fees;
j. Entrance fees;
k. Registration fees;
l. Medical and dental fees
m. Cultural fees; and
n. Other similar or related fees.

Provided, that only the first copies/ printouts of school ID, library ID and student handbook shall be free, and any subsequent requests by the students can be charged the usual fees.

APPENDIX C
POLICIES, GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES FOR ISABELA STATE UNIVERSITY MANDATORY RANDOM DRUG TESTING OF STUDENTS
MECHANICS

1. The University shall conduct prior consultation with the students, parents and stakeholders and seek approval of the University Academic Council (UAC) and Board of Regents (BOR) prior to the mandatory random drug testing program.

2. The University through the Office of the University Health Services (Infirmary) shall partner with a DOH- accredited drug facility, physician or private medical practitioner duly accredited to administer the drug testing.

3. For old student, the drug testing expenses shall be borne by the university as mandated in Section 36 (c) Article III of the Republic Act 9165 through Board Regulation No. 3 series 2009. For incoming freshman and transferee students, expenses shall be borne by the students.

4. The method that will be used in determining the sample size will be stratified Random Sampling using any method found appropriate or convenient. The total sample size to be used will be at least 5% from among the enrolled students per Campus identified at random as earlier described.

5. The University shall implement the mandatory random drug testing as part of its retention policy requirements.

a. The result of the drug test issued by the partner Drug Testing Center shall be directly forwarded to the Office of the Student Affairs and Services and shall be treated with utmost confidentiality.
b. In case the test result is positive, the Office of Student Affairs and Services shall inform both the parent and the student concerned that a confirmatory test shall be conducted.
c. The Office of Student Affairs and Services shall conduct a conference with the parent and student where the information and process of the confirmatory test shall be discussed.
d. If the student is found to be positive, he or she shall be referred to a DOH accredited agency for medical attention. The student shall be given a probationary period of 6 months or so depending on the diagnosis of the specialized medical practitioner to undergo intervention and rehabilitation program.
e. After the intervention and rehabilitation program, another confirmatory test shall be conducted. If the test yields positive result, the Office of Student Affairs and Services shall recommend disciplinary actions such as but not limited to expulsion.
f. Denial of admission will only be for the most serious grounds, when there is a real threat to the security and well-being of the university.

6. The execution of the drug testing shall be every semester effective upon the approval of the Board of Regents. The Office of Student Affairs and Services (OSAS) together with the Office of the University Health Services shall prepare and submit annual reports to the CHED Regional Office through the Office of the Executive Officer on the implementation of the program.

7. Any faculty, administration, or employee of the University who violates the rules of confidentiality of the results of the drug tests shall, in addition to the sanctions as may be provided by the school policy, be liable under Section 72 or R.A. No. 9165 and other appropriate laws.

8. The refusal of the student to undergo mandatory random drug testing shall be subject to the relevant sanctions as provided in the Student Manual of the Isabela State University, provided that in no case shall such refusal to undergo drug testing gives rise to a presumption of drug use or dependency.

9. The Policies Guidelines and Procedures for Isabela State University Mandatory Random Drug Testing of Students are adhered to under Board Regulation No. 3 Series of 2009 of the Dangerous Drug Board.

APPENDIX D
IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE CASH INCENTIVES FOR MERIT SCHOLARS AND LEADERS
(Board Resolution No. 65, s. 2018)

1. The equivalent free tuition fees for Merit Scholars and Student Leaders shall be given as cash incentives to qualified students as described above.
2. The source of funds shall be borne from the billed amount of tuition and miscellaneous fees from CHED UniFAST.
3. Regardless of the number of scholarships being enjoyed, a student, can still be awarded with the cash incentive accrued to the merit scholarship.
4. The registrar shall certify the list of merit scholars and submit, after enrollment, to the budget office for payroll preparation.
5. Only the scholars listed in the payroll can withdraw the cash incentives upon presentation of a valid school ID. However, this can be withdrawn by another upon presentation of a duly executed authorization by the scholar concerned.

APPENDIX E
POLICIES AND GUIDELINES ON STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS

Definition of Terms

Interest Clubs. These are small groups of students who are joined by their common interests and specializations such as English Club, Math Club, Science Club, etc.

Recognized Student Organization. It is an entity composed of members duly recognized by proper authorities after compliance with prescribed requirements. A recognized student organization is given permission to conduct activities within the university premises.

Student Body Organization. It is a student government organization which is mandatory in nature and whose members are bonafide students of the college where they are currently enrolled.

Supreme Student Council. It is a student government organization which stands as the highest governing body of students in the campus.

Supreme Student Council Federation. It is the umbrella and the highest governing body organization of all student councils.

Policies for the Recognition and Renewal of Student Organization

a. A certificate of recognition and/or renewal shall be issued to the organization and announced/ disseminated by the OSAS only upon evaluation of its Constitution and by-laws, other requirements and program of activities that do not violate any policy of the university and the fundamental law of the land.
b. Any organization that does not renew its registration shall be automatically considered illegitimate.
c. Any organization granted recognition and/or renewal but violated its own statement of purpose and its by- laws or failed to comply with the university policies is subject to the revocation of its certificate of

recognition after a thorough investigation by the Chief of Student Organization and with the approval of the Director of OSAS.

Guidelines for the Conduct of Student Activities

     For activities to be held either inside or outside the campus, the following procedures shall be followed:

a. Secure and submit in triplicate a duly accomplished Activity Permit for the approval of the Director/Chief OSAS;
b. Implement proposed activities in line with the vision and mission of the University;
c. Penalize non-participating members in student activities, the nature of which shall be determined by the concerned organization duly supported by a resolution. If fine is imposed, it should not exceed fifty pesos (P 50.00) per day; and
d. Conduct activities not within one week before the Midterm and Final Examinations.

Requirements for Student Activities

a. Fund Raising Activities
An organization shall accomplish the following:

a.1. Request letter stating the nature, purpose, date, time and venue of the activity;
a.2. Statement of projected income and expenses;
a.3. Manner in which the fund shall be used; and
a.4. Names of students directly in-charge of the fund-raising activity.

b. Raffles conducted on campus for fund raising shall be governed by the following rules:

b.1. Application to conduct raffle shall be filed at the OSAS at least one (1) month before the said activity;

b.2. The application shall indicate the prizes, price per ticket, date, place and time of the raffle;
b.3. A time limit of one month shall be allowed for any organization to raffle off the prizes. Any extension of time shall be approved by the OSAS; and
b.4. The list of winners shall be posted on bulletin boards all over the campus.

c. Solicitation letters shall be signed by the president of the student organization, the adviser, and the Director/Chief of the OSAS. Solicitation letters and solicited funds or merchandise shall be systematically controlled and monitored.

d. For Symposia/Lectures/Seminar workshops/Trainings, the following are the requirements in the conduct of the said activities:
d.1. Training design;
d.2. Speakers' profile or bio-data;
d.3. Copy of the program; and
d.4. Outline of Topic/s

      Appendix F RIGHTS OF THE STUDENTS

Students of the University have the right to:

a. Receive quality and relevant education through competent instruction in accordance to national goals, educational objectives, and the standards of the university for their full development as human beings;
b. Receive guidance and counselling services to provide them with appropriate opportunities to better understand themselves, to make decisions, and to select the field of works suited to their potentials;
c. Express freely their beliefs and opinions as long as these do not disrupt the administrative, academic and discipline of the university;

d. Publish a school paper;
e. Invite resource speakers during convocations, fora, symposia, and assemblies of similar nature;
f. Participate in the formulation and development of policies affecting the university in relation to the local, regional and national laws through representation in the appropriate bodies of the university to be determined and approved by the Board of Regents;
g. Establish, join, and participate in organizations, societies, and clubs recognized by the university for purposes not contrary to law;
h. Be given reasonable security within the university premises;
i. Participate in curricular and co-curricular activities;
j. Be informed of their rights as well as the policies, rules, and regulations affecting them;
k. Be respected as persons with dignity, for their overall physical, social, intellectual, and moral development, for humane and healthful conditions of learning;
l. Enjoy academic freedom;
m. Address their grievances against any wrong doings or injustices committed against them by other students or by any member of the academic community;
n. Access to their university records, the confidentiality and security of which the university shall keep and maintain;
o. Pursue and continue their course until they graduate except in cases of academic deficiencies or violations of disciplinary regulations;
p. Be given assistance on work opportunities through current and available information;
q. Be promptly issued official documents such as certificates, diplomas, transcript of records, grades, and transfer credentials, etc.
r. Be free from involuntary contributions except those approved by their own organizations, clubs or societies; and
s. No student shall be discriminated against nor denied admission based solely on sexual orientation, gender identity and

expression, religion, affiliation, mental or physical abilities, racial and ethnic background, socio-economic class, political beliefs and age.

   Appendix G CODE OF CONDUCT

Article 1.	General Behavior

All students shall:

Section 1. Observe proper decorum and appearance in accordance with university policies;
Section 2. Wear the prescribed uniform and identification card upon entering and while inside the campus;
Section 3. Not be allowed to bring inside the university premises objects, pictures and literatures that are subversive and morally offensive;
Section 4. Not be allowed to enter the university premises under the influence of liquor, drugs, and other prohibited substances;
Section 5. Not be allowed to engage in any form of gambling like lottery, or any other schematic activities which enforce monetary and material contributions;
Section 6. Not be allowed to bring inside the university premises any explosive materials, deadly weapons and other threatening materials;
Section 7. Respect the Philippine Flag, the National Anthem, their teachers, and all officials and employees of the university;
Section 8. Be respectful and be proper in their conduct by refraining from using languages and acts that are disgraceful, vulgar, and indecent, which may cause or tend to disturb other students;
Section 9. Not be allowed to vandalize, damage/destroy any university properties or materials but rather help in preserving and protecting them;

Section 10. Not be allowed to commit any form of littering or unsanitary acts within the university premises;
Section 11. Not be allowed to disturb classes and academic functions in any manner. Electronic gadget/s such as cell phones, tablets, music players should be shut off or be switched to silent mode during class hours and during other school functions and gatherings;
Section 12. Not be allowed to commit any form of dishonesty like cheating and falsification/forgery of any document;
Section 13. Not be allowed to organize and maintain any form of unauthorized barricade or obstruction to any entrance or exit of the university or to prevent, coerce, or threaten other students and employees of the university from entering to or going out of the campus;
Section 14. Not be allowed to be involved in fraternities and sororities using coercion, hazing, physical harm, or inflictions to fellow students;
Section 15. Not be allowed to smoke within the university premises;
Section 16. Refrain from public display of affection, intimacy and act of lasciviousness;
Section 17. Not be allowed to pierce any parts of their body to wear studs or earrings particularly male students while in the university; and
Section 18. Have neatly-done and well-groomed, hair dyed must be shade of brown.

Article II.	Classroom Behavior

All students shall:

Section 1. Always display courtesy at all times and give due respect to any faculty inside the classroom;
Section 2. Enter and leave the room quietly with permission from the instructor/professor;
Section 3. Maintain cleanliness and orderliness of their classroom; and

Section 4. Observe silence during examinations and while important activities are being conducted. Any form of noise not conducive in the facilitation of learning inside the class shall not be allowed.

Article III. Behavior of Students in the Use of School Facilities

Section 1. All students shall be prohibited from bringing inside the computer laboratory unauthorized software and program which contains virus, including downloading of programs without any permission from the instructor.
Section 2. All students shall secure library card to avail of different library services and must abide by the rules and regulations of the library. Library users shall at all times observe proper conduct. Smoking, eating, drinking, making unnecessary noise, loud conversations, and mutilation of library materials, and equipment in the library premises are strictly prohibited.
Section 3. All students shall not be allowed to loiter, create any form of disturbances and shall always keep stairways and corridors and the campus vicinity free from obstructions.

Article IV.	Behavior of Students Outside the Campus

Section 1. All bonafide students of the University wearing the prescribed university uniform, shall at all times refrain from committing acts that cause embarrassment and disgrace to the university such acts include, but not limited, to the following:

1.1. Public display of affection or intimacy;
1.2. Drunkenness;
1.3. Disturbance of public peace and order due to the influence of drugs or other harmful substances and also carrying of firearms and other deadly weapons; and

1.4. Unruly and boisterous behaviour.

Article V.	Student Attire

Section 1. Students shall wear their prescribed school uniform at all times.
Section 2. P.E./NSTP/Organization uniforms shall only be worn during designated schedules.
Section 3. Any indecent outfit such as, but not limited to: plunging necklines, see-through, backless, mini-skirts or shorts, tight fitted pants, tattered pants shall not be allowed.

Appendix H
PROCEDURES FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF COMPLAINTS/ GRIEVANCES

1. Any student, faculty/ staff or the University may file a complaint, or a charge against a student.
2. The complaint or charge must be in writing under oath.
3. For cases classified as minor offenses, the complaint or charge must be filed with the office of the College Dean where the student belongs.
4. Upon receipt of the complaint, the College Dean shall constitute the College Committee on Discipline (CCD).
5. The College Committee on Discipline (CCD) shall compose of the Program Chair/ Department Chair as case may be as Chairman, where the student belongs, the SBO adviser, two faculty members and the SBO President or representative.
6. Within (5) days from its constitution, the College Committee on Discipline (CCD) shall issue summons to the respondents with the copy of the complaint.
7. Service of summons may be by personal delivery or by registered mail. If the respondent is a minor, the summons shall be served to the parents or guardians.

Section 1. SUMMONS
1. The College Committee on Discipline (CCD)

     The Respondent shall be required to answer within a non- extendible period of time (5) days from receipt of the summons. If the respondent fails to answer within the time frame for him to answer, he/ she is deemed to have waived his/ her right to present his/ her side.

     After the answer had been submitted, the College Committee on Discipline (CCD) may summon both parties for clarificatory questions in determining whether there is a prima facie case.

     In the event that the College Committee on Discipline (CCD) finds no prima facie case, the Committee shall dismiss the case. If the College Committee on Discipline (CCD) finds a prima facie case, it will issue a Formal Charge. The finding of whether or not there exists a prima facie case by the College Committee on Discipline (CCD) is final and not appealable.

Section 2. PRELIMINARY MEETING

     Within one week after the receipt of the answer or after the expiration of the period within which to file answer, the preliminary meeting shall be held.

The Matters

1. The possibility of amicable settlement.
2. Stipulation of the facts.
3. Marking of evidence.
4. Witnesses.
5. Dates of hearing and other matters for the speedy resolution of the case.
- Any agreement shall be reduced in writing which shall be binding between the parties.
- If the Complaint failed to appear, it will be a ground for the dismissal of the complaint.

- If the Respondent failed to appear, it has the same effectas failure to answer.

Section 3. HEARING

1. The hearing shall be summary in nature and
2. The order of presentation of evidence shall be asfollows;
- a. The complainant shall present the evidence
- b. The respondent shall present evidence
     In cases involving major offenses the procedure in the Committee on Discipline shall be adopted except the composition of the Committee on Discipline which should be headed by the Campus OSAS Director, the SSC President two faculty members and the Campus ARA as members.

    During the proceedings, the University Legal Officer would be requested to assist the Committee.

     The respondents shall represent himself/ herself, themselves and shall have the right to counsel.

However, the appearance of the counsel is limited to advice only.

Section 4. DECISION

     The College Committee on Discipline (CCD) and the Campus Committee on Discipline shall decide the case within twenty (20) days from the submission of the last pleading or from the date of the last hearing as the case may be.

     The decision of the Committee shall become final and executory after the lapse of the reglementary period of ten (10) days for filing a motion for reconsideration or an appeal.

     The decision of the College Committee on Discipline (CCD) may be appealed to the Campus Committee on Discipline. The decision of the Campus Committee may be appealed to the University Committee on

Discipline which shall compose of the University Legal Officer as Chairman, the University OSAS Director, the University Director for Instruction (DI), the Student Regent and one faculty as members.

Appendix I
POSTERS, BANNERS, STREAMERS

Section 1. Only posters or similar literatures approved by the Office of Student Affairs and Services shall be allowed to be posted on designated areas.
Section 2. Banners and streamers for announcement, promotion, or other similar cases shall be approved by the Office of the Executive Officer or Campus Administrator of the Campus upon endorsement of the OSAS.

Appendix J UNIVERSITY SEAL

Section 1. No student shall be allowed to use the University Seal or to any manner of reproduction without the approval of the College Dean, and the Campus Executive Officer or Campus Administrator.

Appendix K
REPUBLIC ACT 9165: COMPREHENSIVE DANGEROUS DRUGS ACT OF 2002

Section1. Students shall observe the general guidelines of CHED Memorandum Order No. 64 series of 2017 entitled, "Policies, Guidelines and Procedures for Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) Requiring Drug Testing to Students."
Section 2. The Director of Health Services shall facilitate the implementation of the said CMO in accordance to R.A. 9165.

Appendix L
ANTI-SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY

Section 1. The anti-sexual harassment policy of the university shall be based on the provisions of Republic Act 7877, otherwise known as the Anti-Sexual Harassment Law.

    Appendix M ANTI-HAZING POLICY

Section 1. The anti-hazing policy of the university shall be based on the provisions of Republic Act No. 8049, otherwise known as the Anti-Hazing Law.

Appendix N
ANTI- VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN ACT

Section 1. The anti-violence against women and children policy of the university shall be based on the provisions of Republic Act 9262, otherwise known as the Anti-Violence Against Women and Children Act.

Appendix O
AN ACT AMENDING REPUBLIC ACT 7277, known as the "Magna Carta for Disabled Persons and for Other Purposes"

Section 1. The policy of the university on public ridicule and vilification against persons with disability shall be based on the provisions of Republic Act 7277, otherwise known as the Magna Carta for Disabled Persons.

Appendix P
REPUBLIC ACT 7079: CAMPUS JOURNALISM ACT OF 1991

Section 1. The policy of the university in the development and promotion of campus journalism shall be based on the provisions of Republic Act 7079.

Appendix Q
AN ACT DEFINING AND PENALIZING THE CRIME OF PHOTO AND VIDEO VOYEURISM, PRESCRIBING PENALTIES THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Section 1. The policy of the university on the crime of photo and video voyeurism shall be based on the provisions of Republic Act 9995.

             Appendix R CONFERENCES, SEMINARS, OUTINGS, ETC.

Section 1. Extra-curricular activities may be allowed upon the approval of the Vice President for Academic and Related Affairs and recommendation of the Director of Student Affairs and Services subject to IRR.

Appendix S
POLICIES AND GUIDELINES ON LOCAL OFF-CAMPUS ACTIVITIES
(CHED Memorandum Order No. 63, s. 2017)

The activities shall include but not limited to the following:

1. Curricular
1.a. Educational Tours/ Field Trips
* Visits to reputable firms or government sites and other areas identified by the concerned local government units (LGU's) safe for students;

* Culture and arts related activities such as visits to museums, cultural sites, landmarks and other related venues; or
* Plant industry visit, host training establishment visit, and other related visits.
1.b. Participation and/or attendance in degree program-related events
1.c. Field Study/ Experiential Learning/ Related Learning Experience

2. Non-Curricular
2.a. Mission-based activities (e.g., retreat, recollection, etc.);
2.b. Conventions, seminars, conferences, symposiums, trainings and teambuilding;
2.c. Volunteer work including peer helper programs, relief operations, community outreach and immersion;
2.d. Advocacy projects and campaigns;
2.e. Participation in sports activities;
2.f. Activities initiated by recognized various student groups;
2.g. Interschool competitions/ tournaments; or
2.h. Culture and arts performances and competition.
REQUIREMENTSPROOFSA. Before the Educational Visit or Field Trip

Curriculum
The curriculum should include the off-campus activity with corresponding unit credits and time-allotment whether the lecture or laboratory hours, specifying course title and unit credits.


Course Syllabus which reflects the relevance of requiring an educational tour and field tripA.2. Destination

As much as practicable, destination of off- campus activities should be near the concerned HEI in order to minimize cost. CMO No. 11, s. 1997 entitled, Enjoining All Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) in the Country to Make, Insofar as Practicable, All Registered Museums and Cultural Sites and Landmarks as Venues for Educational Tours and Field Trips and Subjects for Studies and Researches may

Appropriate report
serve as guide for the places that may be visited among others, registered museums, cultural sites and landmarks that should be in line with the objectives of the off-campus activity.
The destination and schedule should be relevant to the subject matter.A.3. Handbook or Manual

The requirements and guidelines of the conduct of local off-campus activities should be updated and be included in the students' handbook or manual.

Handbook or ManualA.4. Consent of the Parents or Student's
GuardianDuly notarized/ subscribed consentA.5. Medical Clearance of the StudentsMedical clearance of the students, if appropriate duly signed by the HEI or government physician.A.6. Personnel In-Charge

The designated personnel-in-charge must be an employee of the institution and must have the appropriate qualifications and experiences related to off-campus activities. When necessary, identify overall leader from among the personnel-in-charge.
With appropriate first aid and medical emergency training.
oDesignation or order from the Administration	indicating personnel-in-charge's role and responsibilities before, during and after the off-campus activities
o Relevant certificate on first-aid trainingA.7. First Aid Kit

The HEI should provide a complete first-aid kit.

First-aid kitA.8. Fees/ Fund Source

The fees to be collected from the students must be duly approved and disseminated to concerned stakeholders.


Duly approved schedule of fees
A.9. Insurance

The HEI should provide insurance (individual or group) provision for students, faculty and other concerned stakeholders, for the purpose of the activity.


Proof of insurance provisionA.10. Mobility of Students

A.10.1. Owned by the HEI




A.10.2. Third party or sub-contracting
A.10.2.1. Franchisee











A.10.2.2. Travel and Tour Operator In cases where the service of Travel and Tour Operator is used, it should be duly accredited by the DOT.

If applicable, the HEI must engage an accredited tourist transport vehicle and/or tourist guide with the appropriate permits.
Updated/ valid documents pertaining to registration, insurance coverage, driver's license,	assurance	of roadworthiness, among others.
o Certification from LTFRB for the validity of the franchise of the proposed operator (i.e. legitimate current and up-to- date), if applicable.
o Special Permit from LTFRB if transportation is out-of-line
o Updated/ valid documents pertaining to registration, insurance coverage, driver's license,	assurance	of roadworthiness, etc.
o Copy	of	Travel	and	Tour Operator		Accreditation Certificate by the DOT.
o Duly approved Plan/ Itinerary of travel by the HEI
o Certification from the LTFRB for the validity of the franchise of the proposed operator (i.e. legitimate, current and up-to- date), if applicable.
o Vehicles' updated/ valid documents pertaining to registration,	insurance coverage, driver's license, assurance of roadworthiness, etc.
A.11. LGUs/ NGOs

The HEI should duly coordinate with appropriate LGUs/ NGOs.

Whenever necessary for the safety and convenience of the touring party, advance and proper coordination with the local government units with acknowledged letter from the concerned government agency shall be secured before the scheduled dates of the activity.

o Copy of the letter sent to the LGUs
o Copy of the acknowledgement letter from the LGUsA.12. Activities

A.12.1. General orientation to students A.12.2.Consultation to concerned students,
faculty and stakeholders with attached
minutes of consultation and attendee's
signature
A.12.3. Announcement to students, faculty and parents of the activity one (1) or two
(2) months before the scheduled date of the conduct of the off-campus activities
A.12.4. Briefing to concerned faculty and students and provide the needed info materials before the trip
A.12.5. Learning journals for students
A.12.6. Emergency Preparedness Plan to be given to students and stakeholders.

Minutes and attendance of the briefing and consultation conducted to concerned students, faculty and stakeholders


o Letters to parents, students and adult companion preferably faculty
o Appointment with conform of Personnel-in-charge
o Itinerary
o Handy information materials for students
Standards format of learning journals given to students

Appropriate reportB. During the off-campus activity
    B.1. Personnel-in-charge, identify overall leader (when necessary) with the following tasks:

B.1.1. Accompany the students from the time they assemble for the off-campus activity up to debriefing.
B.1.2. Ensure the provision of the allowable

List of personnel or attendance List of students and/or attendance
seating capacity of the vehicle/s used.

(No student shall be allowed to ride on the roof of motor vehicle or on the boarding platform)

B.1.3. Ensure that program of activities is properly followed as planned or activities can be adjusted as the need arises.




Contract of service with the third partyC. After the off-campus activity

C.1. Learning journals of students
C.2. Assessment report/ Evaluation Report
C.3. Expenditure report
C.4. Debriefing of concerned faculty to students to be able to assess acquisition of learning

Appropriate report/grades Assessment		report	by	faculty including	the	breakdown	of expenses
Breakdown of expenses
Report	on	debriefing	program conducted
Appendix T
GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT

     The University promotes Gender and Development based on the following legal bases:

Republic Act No. 9710 - An Act for the Magna Carta for Women.

Executive Order 273 - Approving and Adopting the Philippine Plan for Gender - Responsive Development, 1995 to 2025.

CMO No. 01, series of 2015- Establishing the Policies and Guidelines on Gender and Development in the Commission on Higher Education and Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)

Appendix U GLOSSARY

1. Unprogrammed Subjects- are subjects not offered in the given term but are being requested by students to be offered on the said term.

2. Leave of Absence- permission not to enroll in the University for at least one semester but not to exceed one year, subject to appeal beyond one year.
3. Validation- the determination of the degree, subject and/or unit a transferee has taken in his/her previous school and assess if it can be carried and considered as completed units for the course enrolled in the University.
4. Dropping- the process of officially excluding a subject from the number of officially enrolled subjects for a given term, due to valid reason within the prescribed reglementary period.
5. Adding- the process of inclusion of a subject in addition to the number of subjects officially enrolled by a student in a given term, due to valid reasons, within the prescribed reglementary period.
6. Returnee Students- students considered for readmission depending on their previous scholastic performance, and the availability of slots/ and must have complied with all the requirements for readmission.
7. Cross-Enrollment- the process of earning an academic unit/subject within the system or in another HEI.
8. Fusing- the process of merging/ combining classes as deemed necessary.

ISU HYMN

I

O glorious seat of learning In our valley dear
We praise her name Isabela State University With rays ever so clear
In graceful strides we bear
Thy standard high that to our quest For knowledge does strive thy youth grow excelling
In cities, fields and mountain sides
we'll sing and cheer for our dear I.S.U.

II

    Beloved Alma Mater Whose name we hold so dear Moulder of our future leaders
Who build our country's glory and fame
  To thee we all pledge Our loyalty, faith and love
And always to cherish and honor thee Throughout eternity


Lyrics by:

Prof. Edgardo V. Babaran and Prof. Evangeline P. Juan

Music by:

Mr. Constante Tabalba

ISU MARCH

I

Hail to the Ceres Beauty Pride of Isabela dear Resplendent with your glory
Shining honors bring to our valley Thou shape the offspring of men With wisdom and art of roof Your ends most truth
The Nation's strength
We lovely teach its arts and length.

II

Let's march and sing our cheerful song
  Oh, come ISUans come along Let's raise our banner red and gold The glorious emblem of our fold
From North to South from East to West Let's shout and sing this lovely quest Horizons clear our banners high
A touch color 'neath the sky.

III

Come! Let us fight!
Let us move onward to victory Shout it loud!
The spirit of glory
Our very own Isabela State University! (Repeat I)






